<!--
# 2023 DATEV Challenge Roth
-->

![2023 DATEV Challenge Roth](/assets/svg/challenge-roth-logo.svg)
<p class="timestamp">June 25, 2023</p>

This was my third Ironman distance event.  
I hope you enjoy the read.

<h3 style="margin:28px 0 4px 0;">SECTIONS</h3>
<ul class="alt">
 <li><a href="javascript:flkty.select(4);">RACE MORNING</a></li>
 <li><a href="javascript:flkty.select(6);">3.8&#8239;KM SWIM</a></li>
 <li><a href="javascript:flkty.select(9);">178&#8239;KM BIKE</a></li>
 <li><a href="javascript:flkty.select(16);">41&#8239;KM RUN</a></li>
 <li><a href="javascript:flkty.select(24);">FINAL THOUGHTS</a></li>
</ul>
<h3 style="margin-top:14px;">CHALLENGE ROTH YOUTUBE VIDEO</h3>
<a href="https://youtu.be/live/GySeS8N3OLw" target="_blank">DATEV Challenge Roth powered by hep 2023</a>

<!---->
## PREAMBLE

The alarm goes off, I feel like I'd had just fallen sleep. My 
iPad is near by and I have the registration page preloaded in 
the browser.

57... 58... 59...  click.  I am in.

Was is really that easy?

For fun, I open a second browser window; that webpage says the 
race is sold out.  I complete the registration form on the 
first page.

_"Honey, can we go to Germany?"_

Preparation starts 38 weeks out from race day; the bulk of the 
activities are in the daylight limited winter. 

A very consistent streak is interrupted by COVID at the end of 
January.  Rolling an ankle and breaking my cuboid threatens to 
derail everything just 13 weeks before the race.

In addition to the preparation for Challenge Roth was 
planning, then marrying my sweetheart on May 21st!

![](/assets/jpg/challenge-roth-morning-977x550.jpeg?v45)

It could not have been a nicer summer morning here in 
_Franconia_.

Our destination is a parking area in _Heuberg_. The A9 
Autobahn is free and clear on the drive from _N체rnberg_. 
On country road 2225 however, traffic is moving slowly; 
a glance at the clock on the car's dash, there is time.

Walking to the swim start there are generally those 
comfortably strolling to find a spot to spectate and those 
more anxiously moving to get to thier racked bike.  I am 
definitely in the later group.

In the distance, music is playing from the sound system at the 
swim start.  It beckons triathletes to the south shore of the 
canal.

I stop on the bridge and take in the scene.  Roth is no longer 
a video on YouTube; I am here.

I make a beeline for my bike. Bottles placed, bike computer on 
and the pressure in my tires topped up.

Now almost _two hours_ to wait; I start at 07:50.

![](/assets/jpg/challenge-roth-swim-977x550.jpeg?v45)

Early this spring, I logged into the _Challenge Roth_ website 
and changed my estimated overall finish time to a faster time.
The thought was that I'd get myself into a cohort of athletes 
that swim roughly the same pace as me.

I also thought that would put me into the water sooner and get 
a buffer of time for the run. It doesn't work that way here; 
faster swimmers start later and my group is third from last to 
go.

I watch the professional men exit the water and head out on the 
bike to pass the time.

Finally my wait is over, _Group 15_ is called.  We form a line 
and it is a slow procession to the edge of the water. The 
announced water temperature is 21째C. There is some turbidity 
but the water is cleaner that I expected.

A short swim to the start line and _BOOM!_  A cannon fires and 
I am swimming with 250 new friends.

I follow the mass of arms and heads.  There is more contact 
than I've experienced before. I am ok with it.

<!---->
The first leg of the swim is in an easterly direction; the 
glare from the sun is making the buoys super hard to see. 
Fortunately the first turn is under the _ST 2220 Bridge_; 
sighting to that is super easy. 

I never found the definitive answer regarding the best way to 
swim this canal. Some say that close to shore is faster. 
Conversely, I've heard that there isn't much of a difference. 

I choose to swim the buoy line.

Breathing to my right, I see many more that are choosing to 
swim close to shore. I am pretty sure my overall energy 
expenditure would be higher getting caught up in that crowd.

~500m to go and I find feet to swim behind; things are feeling 
too easy and I wonder if I am saving engery or wasting time.

I think back to the feeling I had while finishing the swim at 
[IRONMAN Canada](2022-ironman-canada-penticton). Back then, I 
felt like I could swim another lap.

I feel that way now.

![](/assets/jpg/challenge-roth-bike-977x550.jpeg?v45)

Transition is smooth and I am riding my bike over the bridge. 
I have _"bike legs"_ right from the first pedal stroke. 

The speed is higher than I envisioned in the beginning.  On my 
bike computer, I have one predominant metric displayed.  My 
heart-rate is in the low 130s, I could get it lower.

My head is up as I approach a crowd of cyclists navigating the 
first solid hill past _Heideck_.  A guy tricked out with a 
black bike, black trisuit, black helmet with a really long 
tail and a blacked out visor passes me.  He is standing up, 
going for broke with maybe 160 kilometres to go.

_"The Batman"_ pedals himself into a slower rider and I hear a 
crunching sound. There is swearing in German as he swerves, 
then swerves some more before hitting the deck with an even 
louder crunch of more broken carbon.  Yelling ensues, fists 
are clenched.

I don't know who was right and who was wrong but a course 
marshal on a motorcycle behind me also witnesses the 
spectacle.  I leave it to officials to break up the 
donnybrook.

<!---->
Now conscious of riders coming up behind me with speed, I hear 
another disc wheel approaching.  Blue kit, blue bike, it is 
_Patrick Lange_ with _Ben Kanute_ in tow.

My turn to yell, _"Go get him Ben!"_

The bike course is net downhill for the 10 kilometre stretch 
to the village of _Greding_, home of _"The Big Hill"_.  On my 
left, _Daniela Ryf_ goes zipping past me.  She is rock solid 
and fast!  I note the time, 1 hour, 11 minutes into my ride. 
There should be more of the female race coming through soon.

Heading up _Greding_, I pick off fellow age groupers that beat 
me to the base of the hill.  I am almost feeling guilty of how 
effortless the climb is.

I am quickly put in my place; another rider flys by on my left 
much faster than I am expecting.  I see a flash of pink on the 
race-kit and catch the number plate all athletes have zip tied 
to the seat tubes of our bikes; it is number 24.

_"Way to go Ernie!"_

<!---->
Professional triathlete, _Ernest Mantel_ looks back and 
flashes me a big smile.  If my mood was good going up this 
hill, my energy was over the top now.  Ernie and I have a 
connection as we both share the same coach, _Elliot Bassett_ 
[<a href="" target="_blank">Mountain Endurance</a>].  _Ernie_ 
gives me a fist pump of encouragement before flying over the 
horizon.  I continue on.

What goes up, must come down.

A set of switchbacks provide a bit of fun.  I pass other 
age-groupers; a quick glance behind before entering the next 
corner and I am amazed how much distance I am putting into 
those I am sharing this hill with.

Through the village of _Offenbau_ I get some perspective into 
the eventual result of the female race.  _Lisa Norden_ rolls 
passed me, more than 30 minutes after _Ryf_.  I don't think 
I'll need to ask who will be crowned winner on the day.

_Chelsea Sodaro_ passes me next and I give her a huge cheer. 
It dawns on me that within the professional field, I have only 
cheered for the American athletes.

![](/assets/jpg/challenge-roth-solarerberg-977x550.jpeg)

At the end of a chute is a wall of humans; to my left, a DJ 
adds to the party. As I enter crowd, as if on cue, as if 
the DJ picked a song just for me, the intro of Van Halen's 
_"Jump"_ begins. 

It was 1984 when this song was released, I played my copy of 
that album until the vinyl wore out. In those pre-teen years, I 
rode my BMX like my hair was on fire. 

In an instant, I am _that kid_ again.

From _Morlach_ back into _Hilpostein_, the road is fast and 
there is a bit of a tailwind. _Carina_ is waiting on the 
corner as I make the final turn to complete the first lap of 
the course.  I am really happy to see her.

Second loop and there is a difference this go around.  Those 
that just made the left turn in _Eckersm체hlen_ are looking at 
another 85 kilometres and the group energy changes. Faces have 
less smiles, postures on the bike look more slumped.

The easterly headwind down to _Greding_ has a little more 
oomph and it is getting warm.
<!---->

The pockets of crowds dotting the countryside road remain 
enthusiastic.  The volunteers at the aid stations are still 
happy and enjoying the day.

I am right on track with calories; thirst however, is no 
longer a gauge I think I can rely on. I am drinking water 
whether I feel the need or not. Thankfully, the aid stations 
are frequent and I am never out of water.

Some really fast cyclists participating in the relay event 
whip by on my left. &mdash;  _&#35;notmyevent_

I recognize a couple of faces still cheering at 
_Solarer&#8239;Berg_; most of the crowd has left for _Roth_ to 
watch the professional field at the finish line.  With more 
room, I am up the hill quicker this lap.

A German participant named _Ralf_ passes me before _Morlach_; I 
overtake him heading into _Hilpostein_.  Our back and forth 
continues and this feels like a race.  I think I've dropped 
him for good on the descent into _Eckersm체hlen_.

Now just 800m to go, _Ralf_ zips past on my left, racing into 
transition ahead of me.

<p class="continue"><sup>(End of the 2nd Period: &nbsp; Deutschland 1, Canada 0)</sup></p>

![](/assets/jpg/challenge-roth-run-977x550.jpeg?v45)

A volunteer takes my bike; another volunteer hands me my run 
bag.  The professionals make the change into their running 
shoes look easy.  I struggle to find a place to sit in a very 
hot and very crowded tent.

Spectators line the street heading out from T2. They 
enthusiastically encourage me to run, but my walk is 
intensional and planned.

To an english speaking spectator, I give a confident smile and 
reply, _"I got this."_

The plan that _Elliot_ and I discussed a few days ago was 4 
minutes jogging, 1 minute walking. I have this interval 
programmed into my watch for 60 reps.  Pressing the lap button 
starts the workout and from there, I will go on auto-pilot.

5 minutes goes by and I am still walking. The road here is 
pointing downhill; that probably would do me more harm than 
good. Patience is my friend right now.

I am ready. It's time to go; I press the lap button.

_Beep, &nbsp;beep, &nbsp;beep, &nbsp;beep, &nbsp;beeeeeeep..._

<!---->
Through 8 kilometres, I am feeling fresh.  Jogging the gravel 
path along the canal is easy on the legs; the heat of 
the day has the opposite effect.

Far up the path I spot a curiously familiar yellow trisuit, 
I am closing in on it.

During the bike leg, the bib numbers are worn facing toward 
the back; for the run, they are facing forward.  I run along 
side the yellow tri-suit, glacing at the name on the bib.

_"Hello Ralf, do you speak english?"_

He replies, _"Yes, a little. You are The Canadian..."_

Right now, my run/walk strategy is roughly in sync with his 
pace; we chat briefly each time we pass each other.

Eventually, _Ralf_ stops catching me on my walk reps. I 
thought I'd dropped this guy on the bike and he proved to be 
resilient then; I press on.

At the 15&#8239;km marker and the canal continues further than 
I can see. Things are quiet, less people talking. The sun is 
intense.

<!---->
I am drinking water through every aid station.  The little 
extra in the cup I pour over my head.

Between aid stations I am getting calories in with the 
PowerBar gels on offer. They are sitting well and I am liking 
the flavours.  Some flavours are caffeinated and I make sure 
to mix in the non-caffeinated packets.

At this aid station, there isn't a volunteer with a gel in 
hand.  Not to worry as they are consistently found on the 
middle table. I grab one for the road, _Green Apple_ flavour.

Finally heading southbound on the canal, my feet are getting 
tired and the 4 minute reps are feeling a bit longer.  

A relay runner passes me.  He says something in German; 
from his body language, I understand it as positive words 
of encouragement.

A bit past the 28&#8239;km sign, _Carina_ has found me on the 
run course.  It's a good time to take a break from the 4x1 
beeping from my watch. I walk with my sweetheart for a bit, 
talking about how each other's day has gone so far.

<!---->
With a more Canadian accent than mine, I hear, _"Hey Mario!"_ 

His race complete, _Ernie_ is heading back to his home stay. 
We stop for a bit and he asks how my day is going.  My answer, 
_"Fantastic!"_  &nbsp;We learn about his great day here at 
_Roth_ as well.  

Saying goodbye to _Ernie_, then to _Carina_, I am back to my 4 
minute interval workout.  Heading through Roth's old town is a 
blast.  The crowds are cheering, the music is pumping and old 
cobblestone streets are really, no big deal. 

_Ernie_ did caution me about _"The Hill"_. Maybe a 5% grade 
but it goes forever.  I am happy chipping away at it, 4 
minutes at a time.

Out of the corner of my eye, I catch an American flag on the 
bib of another participant grinding her way up the hill.  I 
say, "Hello."

_Whitney_ is here with her husband and her mom.  She is on her 
way to completing her _8th_ full distance triathlon, it is her 
mother's _30th!_  _Whitney_ has been to _Victoria_ for our 
local 70.3 and the conversation starts from there.

<!---->
At IRONMAN Italy, I had Davide to share the pain of the 
remaining kilometres with.  At IRONMAN Canada, I had Kevin 
right on my tail, pushing me to the finish.  This year, it is a 
great conversation about triathlon with _Whitney_ that has me 
forgetting the dull ache in my quadriceps.

_Whitney_ may be on pace for an Ironman PR.  I wish her well 
and she continues up the road.

I walk for a bit, content with soaking in the charm of this 
amazing German race. If I would have looked at my watch before 
saying goodbye, I'd have seen that I was on pace for a 
run PR too.

By chance, I met a local triathlete last Sunday when I 
pre-road the bike course.  Just like he said he would, 
_Florian_ has been following my progress throughout the day 
and this evening, he made his way out to the last couple 
kilometres of the run to cheer _me_ on.

What an awesome gesture!  _Florian_ is a great example of how 
genuinely friendly the people of _Roth_ and the _surrounding 
communities_ truly are.

<!---->
Crossing the railroad tracks, now just a few hundred metres 
to go.  Ahead of me is a group of three, all wearing the same 
kit.  I look back to see a lone athlete, maybe 80m back.

I enter the stadium. _Felix Walchsh철fer_ greets me with a huge 
smile and congratulations.

The finish line announcer calls out my name.  There is time 
between me and the other finishers for him to share with the 
crowd that I had recently married my sweetheart and that we 
were in _Roth_ enjoying our honeymoon!

I cross the line. 4-time Ironman World Champion, _Chrissie 
Wellington_ places a finisher's medal around my neck. We talk 
for a bit and she congratulates me on finishing before dark. 
I glance at the sky, _"Hey, she's right."_

The run is over, my race is over. I have an incredible feeling 
of gratitude for this moment, this day, this place, these 
people and everything I have in my life.

_Challenge Roth 2023_ will be cherished.

![](/assets/jpg/challenge-roth-finish-977x550.jpeg)

## FINAL THOUGHTS

The internet is full of content detailing this year's edition 
of _Challenge Roth_; many from the pro field documented their 
race experiences on YouTube; all articulating a common theme:   

Roth is more than a race, _it is an experience_.

---

Arriving in _Roth_ for the first time, days before the 
event, I saw a banner hung high above a street that read 
_"WELCOME HOME TRIATHLETES"_.

In the next days, that banner's message became more and more 
clear to me.  This place in the beautiful Franconian 
countryside really does feel like home.  

As a first-time participant, the logistics of this race were 
admittingly a challenge. However, after experiencing _Roth_ 
and how everything comes together on race day, those logistics 
are not as big as they seem.  I'd do it again in a heartbeat.

And having a shower at the end of a race?  
_SO AWESOME!_

<!---->
## VIELEN DANK

Coach Elliot Bassett, <a href="https://mtnendurance.com" target="_blank">Mountain Endurance</a>  
Once again proving to be the strategic mastermind behind my 
daily preparation.

9 weeks ago I finally ditched my walking boot. Still, the 
injury continued to play with my confidence; Elliot stayed 
solid to the plan. When I didn't articulate how sore my ankle 
really was, he knew and despite little run volume leading into 
_Challenge Roth_, Elliot had me well prepared. 

---

Sabine Hoffman, thank you for hosting us in _Hasenbuck_.  We 
truly felt at home while staying in your place.

---

Martin Kern, I enjoyed our ride out to _Heroldsberg_. Taking 
the time to show me the nuances of riding around _N체rnberg_ 
was immeasurable to my experience in Germany.

---

Carina, the loving person in my life that makes me smile 
everyday.  I love you and we are off on our next adventure!

