<!--
# 2023 Xterra Whistler
-->

![2023 Xterra Whister](/assets/svg/xterra-whistler-logo.svg)
<p class="timestamp">September 17, 2023</p>

## My first off-road triathlon.

It is a new experience to roll out of bed, jump on my bike and 
in about a mile, roll into transition on race morning.  No day 
before bike check-in, just pick the spot you'd like to rack 
your bike; coffee is just over at that table.

I was expecting the air temperature to be cold.  All week, 
Whistler has be waking up to ~6°C; this morning it feels like 
a balmy 9°C.  The plan to stay out of the water is amended and 
I swim out to the first floating dock; a quick 5 minutes in 
and out of the lake.

A small field of elites hit the water first.  It is a mass 
start from the beach for the rest of the ~100 age-group 
participants.  I find a spot on the water's edge, swimmer's 
left.

![](/assets/svg/image-977x550.svg)
The horn sounds.  A female athlete goes by my left shoulder 
like she is shot out of a cannon.  I walk briskly into the 
water until I am waist deep. Time to dive in.

The water feels cold to start.  I check in with my breathing, 
everything is a go.

I the crowd I am swimming with is pulling away as we pass a 
floating swim dock, maybe 80m from shore.  I may no be one of 
the faster fish in this little pond.  I sight to a red buoy in 
the distance.

You know, I suspected as much...

The flurry of arms and swim caps that pulled away from me at 
the beach are starting to come back to me now. The water still 
feels cold.  I breathe 
and continue on.

Swim Time: _28:39_.  Not lighting the lake on fire...

They had us wear the timeline chip on the outside of our 
wetsuits and with that, I lost a bit of time having to briefly 
undo the velcro of that chip to get my leg out of the wetsuit.

<!---->
Regardless, I left T1 leading the M50-54 division.

I pedalled toward the first hill and with wet hands, I 
struggled to put my gloves on.  First place zipped past, I am 
in second heading up the first hill.

_Tin Pants_ is a buffed out trail that is fast with 
deceptively sketchy parts; loose sand over hard packed surface 
had my front tire plowing in a corner or three.  I didn't go 
down but judging by the skid marks, someone ahead of me did.

The eventual winner of the Female 35-39 category passes me.
She looks like she can handle her bike and I followed her 
line.

_Peaches in Regalia_ is the first real bit of single track.  
My rabbit makes time on me going up the twisty hillside, I 
make up the distance to her bouncing down the roots and rocks.

_Centennial Trail_ is a fire road with a steep pitch and loose 
rocks.  There is a line that I see and I power to the top of 
the hill, I am now ahead of my pacer.

![](/assets/svg/image-977x550.svg)
A dip into the forest for more single track on a trail called 
_Ms. Pinky_ leads to a trail called _Toads of the Short 
Forest_. I pick my lines without the help of someone to follow.

F35-39 passes me again; that lead was short lived as we descend 
on _Son of Mr Green Jeans_. We are now on a fire road but she 
is pretty much out of sight heading up the steeper bit of 
_Hydro Hill_.

I catch back up to her just before the hike-a-bike section of 
_Pinnochio’s Furniture_ but on the _"flowy"_ bits of _Dina 
Moe Hum_, she puts more time into me.  

My left QL is stiff and sore, my quads are burning and my 
calves are feeling cooked from that hike-a-bike; this is 
starting to feel like a race.

The last bit of single track on the first lap is called 
_Fountain of Love_; behind me, someone asking to ride through. 
I find space and a guy powers by. He's in my age division.  I 
press to match his pace when a rock, or a root, or whatever, 
puts me on the ground.  
<!---->
I pick myself up quickly and get back on my bike but 3rd place 
just rode around the corner and out of site.

First lap of the bike is done and I am back on the sandy 
corners of _Tin Pants_.  Another woman, this one in the F40-45 
division is charging hard.  I follow her line; she's pulls me 
back to the leader of the F35-39 division.

I pass both women while heading up _Centennial_.

Maybe it was my fuelling, maybe it was being just a bit more 
familiar with the trails on the second lap, but male or 
female, I am not passed on the bike course again.

I'm in _Transition_, left shoe on, right shoe on.  I notice 
that F35-39 is still relentlessly in pursuit.  I hightail it 
out on to the run course.

The trail is gradual uphill for the first kilometre.  Without 
the sound of wheels and suspension bounce over terrain, it is 
very peaceful.

I hear footsteps. To my left, I offer, "Hey, great ride."  I 
get a fist pump, "You too!"

<!---->
It is mostly groomed downhill for the next two kilometres.  I 
have a gel and a cup of water as I pass the aid station. Both 
my IT bands are now tight, right where they intersect the 
lateral aspect of each knee.  I acknowledge the discomfort and 
carry on.

I was told I'd know that I'd reach the _WALL_ when I got 
there.  Yes, it is pretty evident.  I walk up.

A rocky and loose decent off the hill continues to the aid 
station.  I am being passed by a number of people.  I am not 
counting, my attention is focused on being safe and not 
turning an ankle.

A _Zoot_ trisuit passes me.  The age written on her calf let's 
me know she's my age.  She runs with rhythm.  Her name is 
_Linda_ and I try to keep up.

I see where her foot hits the trail, I do my best to put my 
foot there too.  In a minute or two, I forgrt about my sore 
knees, my fatigued quads or the fact that I was even in a 
race.

The final two kilometres simply flowed. This Xterra thing is 
pretty fun!

<!---->
### FINAL NUMBERS
<table><!-- style="position:absolute;bottom:0;">-->
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="width:25%;"></th>
   <th style="width:25%;text-align:right;">Time</th>
   <th style="width:25%;text-align:right;">M50-54</th>
   <th style="width:25%;text-align:right;">Overall</th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr><td>Swim </td><td style="text-align:right;">28:39</td><td style="text-align:right;">2</td><td style="text-align:right;">?</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Bike </td><td style="text-align:right;">1:48:21</td><td style="text-align:right;">?</td><td style="text-align:right;">?</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Run  </td><td style="text-align:right;">1:16:32</td><td style="text-align:right;">?</td><td style="text-align:right;">?</td></tr>
  <tr><td>T1/T2</td><td style="text-align:right;">2:55 / 1:52</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr>
 </tbody>
 <tfoot>
  <tr>
   <td>Overall</td>
   <td style="font-weight:bold;text-align:right;">3:38:17</td>
   <td style="font-weight:bold;text-align:right;">   4/7</td>
   <td style="font-weight:bold;text-align:right;">59/107</td>
  </tr>
 </tfoot>
</table>

### TRANSITION SETUP
![](/assets/jpg/image.jpeg)

